SONARJAVA-5291 Create rule S7177: @DirtiesContext should be properly configured (#4610)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S7177/java/rule.adoc

> The `@DirtiesContext` annotation configuration should make sense with the appropriate mode for the target scope.

Reviewer: I think, we can remove this part

== Why is this an issue?

The `@DirtiesContext` annotation marks the ApplicationContext as dirty and indicates that it should be cleared and recreated. 
This is important in tests that modify the context, such as altering the state of singleton beans or databases. 

Misconfiguring `@DirtiesContext` by selecting incorrect `classMode` and `methodMode` values will make the annotation have no effect. 

> Setting the `methodMode` at the class level or the `classMode` at the method level does not have meaning and will not trigger the expected behavior.

Reviewer: I think we can merge the two sentences : 

Misconfiguring `@DirtiesContext` by setting the `methodMode` at the class level or the `classMode` at the method level will make the annotation have no effect.

The `@DirtiesContext` annotation marks the ApplicationContext as dirty and indicates that it should be cleared and recreated. 
This is important in tests that modify the context, such as altering the state of singleton beans or databases. 
However, improper use of the test phase configurations (such as `classMode` or `methodMode`) can lead to redundant or unnecessary context reloads, 

> potentially impacting performance or leading to incorrect test behavior.

Reviewer: I am not sure what we should put in the description. To refresh a bit my knowledge about specification, I was exploring a bit our rules and most seems only to have the title

== Why is this an issue?

Misusing `@DirtiesContext` by selecting incorrect `classMode` and `methodMode` values can result in unnecessary context reloads. 

> For example, using `BEFORE_EACH_TEST_METHOD` at the class level along with `AFTER_METHOD` at the method level can result in the context being reloaded 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, using `BEFORE_EACH_TEST_METHOD` at the class level with `AFTER_METHOD` at the method level triggers unnecessary context reloads increasing test execution time.
```
I think we can be more direct it is not hypothetical and it is better to keep 1 sentence on the same line. It makes better diff afterwards in git.

multiple times unnecessarily. This redundancy wastes resources, increases test execution time, and could lead to unexpected test failures.

Also, configuring the `methodMode` at the class level or the `classMode` at the method level does not have meaning and will not have the expected behavior.

> 

Reviewer: I think we should precisely define on what we will raise an issue.

== How to fix it

=== Code examples

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,java,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
@ContextConfiguration
@DirtiesContext(methodMode = MethodMode.AFTER_METHOD) // Noncompliant, for class-level control, use classMode instead.
public class TestClass {
  @DirtiesContext(classMode = DirtiesContext.ClassMode.AFTER_CLASS) // Noncompliant, for method-level control use methodMode instead
  public void test() {...}
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,java,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
@ContextConfiguration

> @DirtiesContext(classMode = DirtiesContext.ClassMode.AFTER_CLASS) // Noncompliant, for class-level control, use classMode instead.

Reviewer: I think there is a typo, it should not be non compliant

public class TestClass {

>   @DirtiesContext(methodMode = MethodMode.AFTER_METHOD) // Noncompliant, for method-level control use methodMode instead

Reviewer: I think there is a typo, it should not be non compliant

The `@DirtiesContext` annotation configuration should make sense with the appropriate mode for the target scope.

== Why is this an issue?

The `@DirtiesContext` annotation marks the ApplicationContext as dirty and indicates that it should be cleared and recreated. 
This is important in tests that modify the context, such as altering the state of singleton beans or databases. 
However, improper use of the test phase configurations (such as `classMode` or `methodMode`) can lead to redundant or unnecessary context reloads, 
potentially impacting performance or leading to incorrect test behavior.

Misusing `@DirtiesContext` by selecting incorrect `classMode` and `methodMode` values can result in unnecessary context reloads. 
For example, using `BEFORE_EACH_TEST_METHOD` at the class level along with `AFTER_METHOD` at the method level triggers unnecessary context reloads increasing test execution time.
This redundancy wastes resources, increases test execution time, and could lead to unexpected test failures.

Also, configuring the `methodMode` at the class level or the `classMode` at the method level does not have meaning and will not have the expected behavior.

> This rule will raise an issue when the incorrect mode is configured on a @DirtiesContext annotation targeting a different scope.

Reviewer: It was not clear for me on what we were raising from the description. If I understood correctly, we are raising an issue when the class_Mode is used and we are annotating a method and when the method_mode is used an we are annotating a class. This is a problem because the value will be ignored? It would be good to validate the behavior,  I have quickly check online and I did not find any description of what happens.

Concerning the part above, if the annotation is really ignored, we should not talk about unnecessary context reloads, increasing test execution time ... . They may be problems also related to the @DirtiesContext annotation, but the purpose of the check is to raise when an inappropriate mode is used because it is misleading.

Reviewer 2: I reduced the scope of the description to make it simpler

[The docs ](https://docs.spring.io/spring-framework/docs/current/javadoc-api/org/springframework/test/annotation/DirtiesContext.html#classMode()) say that it does not have meaning to set the classMode for methods and vice versa, I assume the behavior will not trigger in that case.
